SAGE: Tool-Augmented LLM Task Solving Strategies
in Scalable Multi-Agent Environments
Robert K. Strehlow1,3∗, Tobias Küster1,3, Oskar F. Kupke1,3, Brandon
Llanque Kurps1,3, Fikret Sivrikaya1,3, Sahin Albayrak1,2
1Technische Universität Berlin (e-mail: first.second@tu-berlin.de)
2DAI-Labor, TU Berlin, Chair of Agent Technologies (e-mail: first.second@dai-labor.de)
3GT-ARC gGmbH (e-mail: first.second@gt-arc.com)
*Corresponding author
This paper is based on the research conducted in the GoKI project, funded by the German Federal Ministry
of Labour and Social Affairs (BMAS) under the funding reference number DKI.00.00032.21. Furthermore, we
acknowledge support by the German Research Foundation and the Open Access Publication Fund of TU Berlin.
Abstract — Large language models (LLMs) mark services and results, are available as Open
have proven to work well in question-answering sce- Source/Open Data on GitHub.
narios, but real-world applications often require ac-
cess to tools for live information or actuation. For
this, LLMs can be extended with tools, which are 1 Introduction
often defined in advance, also allowing for some
fine-tuning for specific use cases. However, rapidly Although large-language models (LLMs) have
evolving software landscapes and individual ser-
vices require the constant development and inte- been proven to work reliably in a question-
gration of new tools. answer scenario [9], many real-world applica-
Domain- or company-specific tools can greatly el- tions require the usage of live knowledge and
evate the usefulness of an LLM, but such custom telemetry. By extending LLMs with microser-
tools can be problematic to integrate, or the LLM vices in the form of tools, responses can be
may fail to reliably understand and use them. For
this, we need strategies to define new tools and in- elevated by selected on-demand information.
tegrate them into the LLM dynamically, as well as Tools are defined in advance and passed to
robust and scalable zero-shot prompting methods the model upon inference, giving the LLM
that can make use of those tools in an efficient man- the choice to formulate one or multiple tool
ner. calls as a response instead of a natural lan-
In this paper, we present “SAGE”, a specialized guage output. Specifically trained models, such
conversational AI interface, based on the OPACA
framework for tool discovery and execution. The as ToolLLaMA [11], which supports 16000+
integration with OPACA makes it easy to add new real-world APIs from RapidAPI, can leverage
tools or services for the LLM to use, while SAGE it- even multi-stage approaches to fulfill certain re-
self presents rich extensibility and modularity. This quests. However, with rapidly evolving soft-
not only provides the ability to seamlessly switch ware environments, growing knowledge bases,
between different models (e.g. GPT, LLAMA), but
also to add and select prompting methods, involv- and the call for individualized service architec-
ing various setups of differently prompted agents for ture, strategies to include and integrate addi-
selecting and executing tools and evaluating the re- tional tools have to be developed and able to
sults. be used in an efficient way.
We implemented a number of task-solving strate- Especially domain-specific applications of
gies, making use of agentic concepts and prompting
methods in various degrees of complexity, and eval- tools that are developed on-site or are embed-
uated those against a comprehensive set of bench- ded in a company-internal infrastructure, for
mark services. The results are promising and high- example mailing services, proprietary knowl-
light the distinct strengths and weaknesses of dif- edge bases, or interactive office devices, can in-
ferent task-solving strategies. Both SAGE and the crease the usability, as well as the receptivity
OPACA framework, as well as the different bench- of LLM systems in modern work environments.
1
arXiv:2601.09750v1  [cs.SE]  12 Jan 2026
The transformation of such services into LLM- 2 Background
tools should be made understandable and ac-
cessible, so a wide range of users are able to de- 2.1 The OPACA Multi-Agent
velop their own LLM-tools, promoting further Framework
integration of diverse services and knowledge An integral part of this work is the multi-
basis into an LLM-pipeline alike. By lowering agent framework OPACA (Open, Language-
the requirements of AI tool development, an and Platform-Independent API for Container-
increase of AI technology in multiple industry ized Agents) [1], which manages and orches-
fields could be realized as well. trates agents with modern agent-, container-,
In this work, we present a system that au- and microservice technologies. It consists of
tonomously chooses and calls tools to fulfill two main components:
user requests. The key aspect of our system is
its ability to generalize and dynamically access • Agent Containers (AC), encapsulating one
and call available tools from an independent or more Agents, each providing different
runtime platform, exposing tools as agent ser- Actions, which can be invoked by an ex-
vices across a unified API. In addition, the sys- ternal event or through proactive, agentic
tem is able to use different models in zero-shot behavior, and
inference calls, accommodating a wide variety • Runtime Platform (RP), the core of the
of application fields without overfitting a spe- framework, managing one or more Agent
cific area. Relying on a uniform model integra- Containers through Docker or Kubernetes,
tion, the deployment and usage of local mod- connecting with other runtime platforms
els can also be supported through the vLLM and providing a user management system
framework [5]. This approach directly enhances and token-based authentication.
the development process and the availability
of new LLM-tools in versatile service environ- Both components provide a REST API, used
ments. for communication between the components
Furthermore, we present different task- and with external services and users. The
solving strategies, consisting of a variety of spe- available routes provide multiple services for
cialized LLM inferences, dividing the response interaction with the deployed containers and
generation process into smaller subtasks. Fi- their agents and to retrieve general information
nally, we test our system and the implemented about the platform. An agent container typi-
task-solving strategies with our own created cally holds one or more agents, providing a mul-
benchmark set and tool evaluation method, titude of different services, or actions, which
focusing on cross-domain response generation. can be called via the RP onto which the AC
All of our code base1, as well as the benchmark has been deployed.
containers2, are publicly available on GitHub. The OPACA framework makes it easy to
The remainder of this paper is structured as develop and deploy new applications on a
follows: We start by giving an overview of the running system and further provides seam-
background (Section 2) and related work (Sec- less interaction with other applications on that
tion 3). Afterwards, we describe the core con- or connected RPs. Applications running in
cepts (Section 4) and architecture (Section 5) OPACA are self-descriptive, following com-
of our framework. In Section 6 we describe dif- mon microservice guidelines. Supporting both
ferent prompting methods implemented in the the OpenAPI standard and a more stream-
system and present a systematic evaluation of lined proprietary format, each AC describes
these methods, as well as the used LLMs, in its agents, those agents’ actions, their param-
Section 7, before wrapping up in Section 8. eters and required data types, as well as op-
tional natural-language descriptions of their
purposes, using a combination of OpenAPI,
1https://github.com/GT-ARC/opaca-llm-ui JSON Schema, and OPACA’s own JSON-based
2https://github.com/RobertStrehlow/ models. These aspects make the OPACA
opaca-llm-benchmark-containers framework well suited for dynamic, distributed,
2
and heterogeneous systems and facilitate access new model generation of various model fami-
to those systems using an LLM. lies, such as the GPT series of OpenAI, Llama
by Meta, Mistral, Gemini and others (cf. [8] for
2.2 Agent Container Development a recent overview).
Especially the composition of function calls
The core of the OPACA framework, the have been explored early on to extend the ca-
Runtime Platform, is publicly available on pabilities of LLMs beyond simple text genera-
GitHub3, while the Agent Containers are in- tion tasks. One of such an approach is Tool-
tended to be developed by users and later former [13], which has fine-tuned a pre-trained
added to a running RP. A reference AC is im- GPT-J model with numerous exemplary API
plemented with Kotlin using JIAC VI [12], but calls. The model was then able to formulate
ACs can be developed in any programming lan- new API calls for novel user inputs in a for-
guage, as long as they provide the API specified mat that can easily be translated to concrete
by OPACA. In addition, a Python SDK has function calls, simplifying the downstream pro-
been developed, streamlining the development cess of autonomously calling external functions.
process for OPACA Agent Containers for ad- Other well-known systems, such as ReAct [18]
vanced and novel users alike by providing high- enhanced such an approach by introducing rea-
level functions and decorators that allow to ex- soning steps between function calls, enabling
pose any function as an agent action or data the model to interpret function call results dur-
stream. ing intermediate steps.
Compared to similar protocols such as Function calling has since become an integral
the Model Context Protocol (MCP) [3], the part of LLMs, broadening the scope of possible
OPACA protocol extends the action/tool ex- integrations in real-world applications or as an
posure with an agentic approach, binding tools embedded software component for tool orches-
to specific agents and containers. Later, a cen- tration. Hence, the call for reliable benchmark
tralized interaction point is handling all inter- sets measuring the effectiveness for models to
action with available actions, in which a con- formulate function calls has become more nec-
nected user does not need to be concerned with essary. Sets such as CallNavi [14] especially
added, removed, updated, or deprecated agent deal with nested function calls, in which the
containers, since the platform manager can eas- parameters first need to be retrieved by an ad-
ily modify the platform during its runtime. ditional function call, which presents a chal-
Due to its language-agnostic architecture lenge even for modern LLM to deal with hidden
and the HTTP protocol used in the OPACA dependencies. Other approaches, such as API-
framework, further AC implementations in Bank [6], emphasize the different steps, being
other programming languages are possible and call, retrieval, and planning, each with the pos-
have already been realized. This could fur- sibility of being evaluated by a tool-augmented
ther allow for a faster adaption of the OPACA LLM.
framework across multiple domains with differ- Advances have also been made to au-
ent coding requirements. tonomously generate LLM conform function
calls. Approaches such as ToolMaker [17] use
LLM agents to generate function calls from
3 Related Work open-source code bases. Reevaluating its own
decision, the function call generation flow in
Following the rapid adoption of AI technol- ToolReflection [10] reflects its own choice of
ogy in recent years, numerous advances have API calls by using self-generated data, re-
been made to enhance the general usability and trieved by the model’s and function call’s error
integration possibility of large language mod- response.
els. The basis for this were realized by the in-
creased model performances, achieved by each Furthermore, the growing popularity of the
Model Context Protocol (MCP) [3] closely re-
3OPACA on GitHub: https://github.com/ sembles the core concept of the OPACA frame-
GT-ARC/opaca-core work itself, although it focuses primarily on
3
function calling for LLMs. The fast and wide etc., by employing proxies such as vLLM
adoption of it further showcases the strong or LiteLLM.
need for a reliable function calling architecture,
which is easily extendable and customizable. • Automatic Tool Calling: After the
While MCP is mainly used in combination with used LLM generates the formal tool call,
LLMs, the OPACA framework allows the cre- our system should automatically call the
ation of a more agentic environment, in which chosen tool(s), receive the results from
tools are mere agent actions and an LLM inte- the connected OPACA RP, and feed them
gration is complementary to the overall design back to the LLM.
structure. In this way, agents can still com- • Zero-Shot Prompting: The models
municate with each other, leveraging their mi- used within the system should not be fine-
croservice architecture advantages, enhancing tuned to accommodate a specific use-case.
the built structure with an overarching LLM Tools are instead passed to the models at
interaction. runtime, assuring the most up-to-date en-
vironment.
4 Concept • Self-Evaluating: The results of the tool
Building upon the foundation laid out in the calls should be evaluated by the LLM in
OPACA framework, we construct and develop the context of the current user request.
an LLM-application interacting with the differ- Follow-up calls can be initiated with addi-
ent ACs of OPACA via its RP. This interaction tional knowledge gained from the previous
is simplified by the standardized API, allow- iteration.
ing for quick service retrieval and invocation. • Resource-Efficiency: The tokens (and
Further, it allows for the dynamic modifica- hence cost) and time it takes to gener-
tion of services available to the LLM at any ate the final result should be analyzed and
point, making the integration of this system evaluated. Both the time and the tokens
into a new environment easy and straightfor- used for LLM calls should be minimized.
ward. This opens up the possibility of the inte-
gration of heterogeneous services into the tool- Note that due to the ambiguous meaning
box of an LLM. of the term “agent”, in the following we will
use the term ‘agent’ only for the agents within
4.1 Design Goals the OPACA system, and the term ‘module’
for what otherwise might be called an “LLM
In this and the next section we present our agent”. Likewise, functions provided by the
developed system “SAGE”, also known as OPACA agents are referred to as ‘actions’, but
“OPACA-LLM”, whose prime functionality is to we will use the common term ‘tool’ once they
answer and fulfill user requests with the help of have been transferred to the LLM world. A
tools, provided as agent actions via the multi- ‘method’ consists of one or more specifically
agent framework OPACA. We define the fol- prompted ‘modules’ (i.e., LLM agents) work-
lowing design goals: ing together.
• Extensibility: The system can be easily 4.2 Tool Call Generation Process
extended with new (alternative or exper-
imental) prompting methods, which are The general process of a request handled by
composed of different LLM modules, with SAGE using tools can be divided into smaller
different granularity and responsibilities. subtasks. This provides a first overview of the
identified steps and a possible role division of
• Model-Independence: The system and different modules within our system.
the different methods implemented within
it can be used with a variety of differ- • Planning: The model should choose the
ent LLM, such as GPT, LLAMA, Mistral, most fitting tools from the available list
4
of tools, and generate a rough plan what
steps have to be taken to reach the goal.
• Construction: Given the information
from the planning phase, the LLM con-
structs a well-structured tool call, includ-
ing the tool name and tool parameters us-
ing the correct data types.
• Evaluation: The results of the invoked Figure 1: SAGE System Architecture
tool calls are analyzed against the initial
user request to determine whether the re-
trieved information can be used to fulfill
the request or additional tool calls are re-
quired.
• Output Generation: All requested in-
formation as well as the retrieval process
are then summarized in the final response
shown to the user.
In addition to the above steps, performed
by the LLM, the following steps are executed Figure 2: Screenshot of SAGE, showing
by the surrounding system before and dur- ‘agents’ panel and empty chat window with ex-
ing/after the LLM calls, respectively: ample prompts.
• Acquisition: Retrieve and prepare agent
actions from the connected OPACA RP
into a well-defined tool-format.
Additionally, a running OPACA RP is re-
• Validation: Iterate over the constructed quired, to which the backend connects upon re-
tool parameters and validate their data quest. While for the core functionality, only the
types against the data types given within backend is required to run, the frontend sim-
the OPACA agent action definitions, try plifies the interaction with SAGE immensely
to perform a simple type casting if neces- by providing a clean and user-friendly inter-
sary. face with an overview of different functional-
• Calling: Given the information from the ities, which are used to send HTTP requests to
selection phase, the tool/action gets called the backend. In the backend, these requests are
via the standardized API of the OPACA handled by a REST API; an additional web-
RP. The results are returned in a well- socket connection between frontend and back-
defined format to the LLM. end also allows for streaming responses and in-
termediate steps to the UI. The different routes
provided by the backend can be used to send
5 Architecture and receive an automated answer, change the
method configuration, get information regard-
The system architecture of SAGE consists of ing the agent actions and more. The back-
two main components: end also includes multiple prompting methods
• Frontend, developed with JavaScript using that implement different approaches to handle
the Vue framework to create interactive UI user requests. All methods can then use mod-
features, and els either hosted locally via vLLM or LiteLLM,
or use externally hosted models, e.g., by Ope-
• Backend, developed with Python using nAI. Figure 1 shows the overall architecture of
FastAPI and providing a REST API to in- SAGE and its peripheral systems. A screenshot
teract with its functionality. of the SAGE frontend can be seen in Figure 2.
5
configurations, and having individual chat his-
tories.
Additionally, ACs can define their own au-
thentication routes, aligned with the OPACA
framework specification for container logins. In
the SAGE UI, any service requiring authentica-
tion will prompt a secure login to the specific
container. Once logged in, the AC can asso-
ciate those credentials (or an accordingly con-
figured client object) with the current user and
automatically retrieve them for each of their
future requests.
Figure 3: Authentication to Runtime Platform 6 Different Methods for LLM
and Agent Container Prompting
SAGE employs different prompt processing
5.1 Multi-Modality strategies, each focusing on different usabil-
Besides basic text input and output, the fron- ity aspects such as correctness, answer quality,
tend also provides interaction via voice, using and speed. In each method, one or multiple
either the browser’s built-in TTS/STT support “LLM Modules” can be used for the final re-
or an external voice server. Further, the UI al- sponse generation process. These modules use
lows one to select one or more files, which are the OpenAI API, which has become a de-facto
then sent to the backend and taken into account standard and can be used with the actual Ope-
for the next LLM request, provided that the nAI endpoints or self-hosted open source LLM,
selected model supports those files, e.g. PDF. using e.g. vLLM or LiteLLM as proxy. Within
The LLM can then summarize those files or each method, multiple iterations might occur,
use information found in the file as input for prompting each LLM module anew with gained
later tool calls. External information sources information from the previous iteration. This
can be included via respective OPACA actions: allows each method to follow a multi-stage so-
at the moment, services for Google, Wikipedia, lution process as well as an evaluation proce-
as well as e-mail, weather, and navigation APIs dure. All methods interact with the OPACA
have been implemented and made available to platform for action retrieval and invocation.
the LLM. The LLM’s response is rendered as • Simple/Simple-Tools: A single LLM mod-
Markdown, so that e.g. images or tables can ule handling all tasks of the tool generation
be embedded directly into the chat output, and process.
further information can be referred to via hy-
perlinks. • Tool-Chain: Two LLM modules splitting
the generation and evaluation part.
5.2 Security and Session Handling • Orchestration: A multi-stage process us-
ing a divide & conquer approach, to divide
The OPACA Framework provides basic au- the given request by the user into smaller
thentication and user management functions, subtasks based on the agent composition
which are also supported by the SAGE UI by of the connected OPACA RP.
asking for matching credentials when connect-
ing to a platform. The message exchange for There has been another implementation
the authentication process between SAGE, the based on the architecture laid out by Song
OPACA RP, and the AC is displayed in Fig- et al. [15], called “Rest-GPT”, in which four
ure 3. SAGE further keeps track of multiple LLM modules were used for selecting, formu-
sessions, allowing individual users to connect lating, calling, and evaluating tool calls, re-
to different runtime platforms, using different spectively. Like the Simple method, it was
6
contain a valid tool call; in this case, the re-
sponse is assumed to be the LLM’s final answer
and sent back to the user.
The Simple method is the only method in
our system that does not use the function call-
ing ability of modern models. On the one hand,
this approach can support any model, since
Figure 4: Overview of the Method Architec- only the basic query and response will be used.
tures implementing the different modules of the However, relying on interpreting the response
Tool Generation Process in 4.2 in their LLM as JSON can lead to premature cancellation of
modules. (Red: Planning, Blue: Construc- the process (outputting the wrongly formatted
tion, Green: Evaluation, Yellow: Output Gen- JSON to the user), especially if the model tends
eration.) to include “chatter” along with the next action
to take. In addition, the method is limited to
performing a single tool call per iteration.
not using the built-in tool calling feature of Despite its simplicity, this approach works
modern models, relying solely on a combina- well, especially when used with strong models
tion of thinking- and structured outputs. It has such as gpt-4o or gpt-4o-mini. The general
since been deemed outdated since the currently response quality of this approach remains sim-
implemented methods surpass its performance ple, with occasional outputs of attempted ac-
while at the same time being easier to main- tion calls in malformed JSON formats. Still, in
tain. most situations, the LLM is able to infer the
Figure 4 shows an overview of the LLM mod- right actions to take, with the right parame-
ules in the different methods and how they in- ters, and also correctly converts the output of
teract with each other. In addition, Table 1 one action into the input for the next (e.g., from
provides a comparison of the most relevant fea- a tuple of longitude and latitude to an object
tures of the different methods. with those attributes).
6.1 Simple 6.2 Simple-Tools
The first method that was implemented utilizes The Simple-Tools method is a variant of the
a single LLM module, fulfilling all the roles, Simple method: It also uses only a single LLM
from tool generation, over tool call evaluation, module for all the roles, called in a loop, but in
up to generating the final output. This module this approach, the integrated “tools” feature of
is called repeatedly in a loop, feeding it back modern models is used to pass available tools to
its previous responses along with the original the LLM and generate tool calls for user queries
user query, until the request has been fulfilled within a special field of the LLM’s response,
or the LLM decides that it cannot be fulfilled. performing a structural validation of the tool
For this, the Simple method relies solely on call beforehand.
the normal input and output generation of an For this, actions acquired from OPACA are
LLM: Available tools are injected directly into converted into a well-defined format, under-
its system prompt as a list of JSON objects, standable for most LLMs, including their name
and likewise the LLM is instructed to output and description, a list of parameters, and defi-
necessary tool calls one at a time in a specific nitions of expected parameter types, similar to
JSON format in its regular chat response con- JSON Schema. This can easily be generated
tent. It is checked whether the generated out- from OPACA’s OpenAPI specification.
put conforms to the expected JSON schema of As in the Simple method, if a tool call
a tool call, and if so, the corresponding OPACA is found in the response, the corresponding
action is invoked with the specified parame- OPACA action is invoked and the result (or
ters, and the result (or error) is appended to error) is added to the messages for the next it-
the messages for the next iteration of the loop. eration of the loop, until the response does not
This is repeated until the response does not include any more tool calls.
7
Method Format Parallel LLM Modules LLM Calls
Simple JSON no 1 n+ 1
Simple-Tools Tools no 1 n+ 1
Tool-Chain Tools yes 2 2n
Orchestrated Tools yes 3k + 4 3n+ 3
Table 1: Comparison of the tool calling behavior of the different prompting methods: What
format tools are provided in, tools can be executed in parallel, how many LLM modules exist,
and how many LLM calls are executed. The parameter k stands for the number of agents on
the OPACA Platform, and n for the number of (sequential) tools to be called.
Unlike the Simple method, multiple tool calls multi-agent environment, providing numerous
can be generated and executed in a single it- services, the Generator module can get over-
eration of the loop, potentially reducing the loaded by the amount of available tools. The
number of necessary LLM calls. Also, by mak- current maximum number of tools supported
ing use of the native tools feature, the system by OpenAI models is 128, which limits the
prompt can be significantly more simple, while amount of serviceable OPACA actions when us-
at the same time achieving a more reliable tool ing this model family and is the reason, why
generation. The downside, of course, is that any additional tools are currently cutoff. Fur-
it only works with models that support tools, ther, a larger amount of available tools will
which nowadays applies to most, but not all, also have an effect on the output quality of
LLMs. Further, the maximum number of tools the Generator, since a large amount of input
can be limited. tokens negatively affect the performance of an
LLM [7].
6.3 Tool-Chain
Like Simple-Tools, the Tool-Chain method
makes use of the built-in “tools” feature of mod- The overall response quality is very good, es-
ern LLMs, but there are two different modules pecially since the Evaluator is tasked directly
in this method: The first module, the “Gen- with the summarization of the internal chain,
erator”, will choose and formulate tool calls making this method comprehensible and trans-
based on the user input and currently avail- parent for users. Another special behavior of
able information, while the second module, the the Evaluator is the missing system prompt
"Evaluator", will summarize the result of these of this module and instead prompting solely
tool calls, after they have been invoked via the with a user message, including the evaluation
OPACA API. Additionally, the Evaluator will and summarization task as well as all the tool
determine whether the achieved results are suf- calls made during this request. This has led
ficient to deem the user query as fulfilled. If so, to an increase in performance for this module,
the output of the second module will be sent as opposed to describing the task in the sys-
back to the user. Otherwise, the first module tem prompt. However, with two LLM modules
will receive the summary from the second mod- this method may increase the necessary time
ule, continuing to output tool calls to fulfill the and token usage for an average call, especially
user request. In the case where no tools are when compared against the simple method de-
necessary, for example, if the user asks about scribed previously. Due to the usage of the inte-
specific functionalities the LLM provides, the grated tool features, the Tool-Chain approach
Generator will not generate any tool calls and does provide the possibility for parallel tool
instead its answer will be directly forwarded to calls, eliminating the necessity for multiple iter-
the user. ations, and thereby reducing the time for com-
This method does have limitations, in parts plex user requests involving multiple, parallel
defined by the used model. With a very large tool calls.
8
6.4 Orchestration Once all activated Agent-Trios are finished,
their results are sent to the “Overall Evalu-
As the number of tools grows, smaller open- ator”, which will compare the combined re-
source models can struggle with function se- sults against the initial user request and will
lection, while other models have a hard limit only output its reiteration decision. This is
on the number of tools (e.g. 128 for OpenAI) done by providing the model with a guided
they can handle. To address this challenge, the choice between the output values REITERATE
Orchestration method defines a multi-stage ap- and FINISHED. In the case of reiteration, the
proach, in which user requests are divided into module “Iteration Advisor” generates a detailed
smaller subtasks, based on the agents deployed summary of the last iteration, the called tools
on the connected RP. The initial user request and their results, a list of issues, and suggested
will be passed to the first LLM module called improvements. It can further decline the re-
“Orchestrator”. This module will have knowl- quest of a reiteration, if it finds its generated
edge about all available agents on the con- output to be sufficient enough to answer the
nected RP including their actions. However, user. The reiteration decision of the Iteration
it does not have detailed information about ac- Advisor will be output lastly, using the autore-
tions, such as the description and parameters, gressive behavior of LLMs [16] to make its de-
which will reduce the overall overhead of the cision more robust. Finally, all information is
initial input. This will also emphasize the im- passed to the Output Generator, which will for-
portance of agent and action names, since the mulate the user response.
Orchestrator has only those two information
available for a further task breakdown. This method is significantly more complex
As seen in Figure 4, the Orchestrator then than the other methods, which can be both
sends its generated subtasks to one or more so- a strength and a weakness. By subdividing
called “Agent-Trios”, which mirror the available the tools across different Agent-Trios, each of
agents on the connected RP and are therefore those calls can be faster and more reliable, but
initialized dynamically. Each Agent-Trio con- the orchestration can have problems if differ-
sists of three LLM modules: ent Agent-Trios have similar capabilities, or if
tasks require much interaction between differ-
1. Planner: Selects the next tool(s) to call ent Agent-Trios. The use of a dedicated output
generator module requires an additional LLM
2. Worker: Formulates the specific tool calls call, but allows for streaming of the final re-
sponse, since it splits the evaluation and re-
3. Evaluator: Evaluates the results sent sponse generation step.
back by the OPACA platform Another key feature of this architecture
is its ability to employ different LLMs for
The overall functionality of it can be com- different pipeline stages. In our imple-
pared to the Tool-Chain approach from the pre- mentation, we achieved comparable perfor-
vious section, while further splitting the tool mance to GPT-4o using a combination of
generation part into a Planner and Worker Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct-2501 (for output
module. The Planner receives a subtask from generation and worker) and Qwen2.5-32B-
the Orchestrator, which potentially still needs Instruct-GPTQ-Int4 (for planning and evalu-
further breakdown into concrete tool calls. The ation tasks). This model configuration will be
Worker then receives the selected tool choices called “open-source-composition” in the follow-
by the Planner in natural language and gener- ing sections. In particular, our experiments re-
ates concrete tool calls from them, using the vealed that while model quantization generally
tools output field. Afterwards, the correspond- preserves most capabilities, as suggested in lit-
ing OPACA actions are invoked. The results erature [4], it significantly affects the accuracy
are evaluated by the Evaluator against the ini- of tool call generation. This makes quantized
tial task sent by the Orchestrator to this Agent- models unsuitable for worker roles despite their
Trio; if the acquired results satisfy the request, viability in other pipeline stages. In our tests,
the Agent-Trio is marked as finished. we used a 4-bit GPTQ [2] quantization for all
9
models except a full 16-bit LLM for the Worker information dependencies gained from sequen-
module. tial tool calls. All prompts have been fur-
ther extended with an expected answer and ex-
pected tool calls. The expected answer will be
7 Evaluation used as a reference for the evaluation with a
Performing an in-depth analysis of our con- judge-LLM. The expected tools follow a strict
structed system represents a major challenge format and include parameter types and values
for a comparable evaluation method. This is for a more definite comparison of the internal
due to the unique integration of the OPACA execution chain of SAGE and the expected be-
framework and the interaction with tools in havior.
the form of OPACA actions. This requires a
testing environment to be available as OPACA 7.2 Metrics
agent containers. Unfortunately, the availabil-
ity of public ACs is very limited and existing During a benchmark test, several metrics are
containers are not meant for evaluation pur- captured to evaluate the overall performance
poses, including actions with varying execution of our system and our implemented methods.
times. Hence, we have constructed specifically Each request captures information about tool
designed ACs, implementing services that sim- calls, token usage, time per LLM module, and
ulate real-world scenarios. Further, extensive how many internal iterations were necessary to
benchmark prompts have been developed, ac- formulate the final result. These results are
commodating the available functions by mak- then consolidated and form the overall met-
ing concrete inputs to our system, expecting a rics for a benchmark run of a certain prompt-
pre-defined result. ing method. An overview of these summarized
metrics is given in the following:
7.1 Data Preparation • Response Score: Value between 1 and
In total, 3 ACs have been constructed, hold- 5. Average score of each request during
ing 15 agents with a total of 102 actions, pro- the benchmark run. The score is given by
viding functionalities in the field of smart- the Judge-LLM by evaluating the expected
office, warehouse-management, and music- answer (curated by a human) against the
player/playlist-management. The containers actual answer of SAGE. Does not consider
have no real-world effect, but maintain state the called tools.
changes, such as the addition or removal of cus-
tomer orders from the warehouse-management • Correct Tool Usage: Number of re-
container. The complexity of the agents range quests that have called all expected tools.
from simple getter-functions to complex object
creations with custom data types. A more de- • Perfect Tool Usage: Number of requests
tailed description of the containers, agents, and that have called all expected tools and no
actions, can be found in the public GitHub additional tools.
repository containing the benchmark agents.4 • Time: Total time of the benchmark run.
The benchmark prompts have all been man-
ually curated and annotated. Overall, we split • Module Time: A breakdown of the time
the prompts into a Single-Tool and Multi-Tool each LLM module has spent as part of the
scenario, which indicates the amount of neces- answer generation process for each request.
sary tool calls a prompt will result in. Prompts
from the Single-Tool set will only require one • Token Usage: Total number of tokens
tool to be called, while the Multi-Tool set will used.
always require at least two tool calls to be
made, either being executed in parallel or with To extract these metrics from our bench-
4https://github.com/RobertStrehlow/ mark tests, the following components were im-
opaca-llm-benchmark-containers plemented:
10
7.2.1 Response Score: Judge-LLM as “Do A and then B”, only for the inter-
nal chain to execute B right away with cor-
Each request includes an expected answer, in- rectly guessed parameters.
dicating what information or contents should
be present in the answer. This allows for a 3. Alternatives: Certain tool calls will pro-
broader range of accepted answers, differing in vide the same information. Since our sys-
style and expression. For this, a judge-LLM is tem is primarily focused on fulfilling re-
tasked to compare the expected answer to the quests for a user, we allow for alternative
actual output of each request. The judge-LLM calls for specific tools. The metric Perfect
is provided with the original request for context Tool Usage will then be considered valid,
and instructions to rate answers on a 1-5 scor- if only one of the grouped alternatives has
ing system, as well as to provide a reason for its been called.
decision, which can help to manually validate
its decision afterwards, if necessary. As a judge, 4. Optionality: Some tools or parameters
we will use the gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 model snap- can be optionally included, but their pres-
shot by OpenAI. For details on how the Judge ence or absence should not alter the valida-
LLM is prompted and the provided descrip- tion of a tool call if they are not influencing
tions of each grading scale, please refer to the the overall result.
test code in the public repository.5
By applying these attributes to the tool
7.2.2 Tool Checking checking part in the benchmark script, the val-
idation of correct tool calls is further strength-
Each request in both benchmark sets (Single- ened by additional insights. This is important
Tool & Multi-Tool) specifies their expected to showcase an additional metric, besides the
tools. This is done by manually curating the response score given by the Judge-LLM, which
name and expected parameters for each tool in is not fully deterministic and may include a cer-
each test case. However, these two values were tain bias in its automatic evaluation [19].
not enough for a proper evaluation, since more
sophisticated requests required a better distinc- 7.2.3 Resource Monitoring
tion for certain situations. Therefore, the fol-
lowing attributes were further included in our SAGE automatically keeps track of the num-
tool checking: ber of internal iterations, completion- and
response-tokens and execution time for each re-
1. String Strictness: Some of our simu- quest and stores them along the final response.
lated services would give specific ids per- It also breaks down the time it took each mod-
taining to a specific name or composition ule to output text or a tool call. The LLM
of names. To mimic the correct behavior of module of a specific method time might not
these implemented tools, string matching add up to the overall time, since the tool call-
can be set to either EXACT, PARTIAL, ing step done by the system itself is not in-
or NONE. If an expected tool call would cluded in those times. For the methods Sim-
then define a PARTIAL string parameter ple/Simple-Tools, such a breakdown is unneces-
as “server”, an actual tool call with the sary, since only one LLM module is used. These
used parameter “Server Room” would still metrics are then extracted and aggregated by
be labeled as correct. the benchmark script.
2. Dependencies: Regarding the Multi-
Tool benchmark set, some tools are de- 7.3 Benchmark Results
pendent on previous tools and should only We have conducted multiple tests, using the
be labeled as correct if the previous call aforementioned ACs and benchmark prompts.
has been made. This should avoid situa- In this section, we will present the gathered re-
tions in which the request was formulated sults, comparing our implemented methods and
5https://github.com/GT-ARC/opaca-llm-ui/ showcase the effectiveness of our constructed
blob/main/tests/test.py system. Further, a discussion and evaluation
11
(a) Correct and Perfect Tool Calls percentage (b) Correct and Perfect Tool Calls percentage
achieved during the Single- and Multi-Tools achieved during the Single- and Multi-Tools
benchmark runs. All LLM modules in all methods benchmark runs. The Orchestration method uses the
were using the gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 model. OSC (see Section 6.4). All remaining methods used
only the Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct-2501 model for
their LLM modules.
Figure 5: Comparison of tool usage across different benchmark types.
of the achieved results will be made, reflecting Method Score (1–5) Time (s) Tokens
on the set goals and translation ability of our (Mio.)
system into other scenarios. The complete re- Simple 4.52 / 3.81 2.36 / 6.14 3.478
sults files are available on the project’s GitHub Simple- 4.68 / 4.20 5.24 / 8.45 3.120
page6. Tools
Tool- 4.72 / 4.00 6.81 / 9.99 3.036
Chain
7.3.1 Final Response Score and Effi- Orches- 4.16 / 3.71 14.26 / 16.98 2.557
ciency Metrics tration
For better comparability, the results in Ta- Table 2: Method comparison
ble 2 are taken from tests using the same model
across all methods. The Judge-LLM uses the
same model for all comparisons (gpt-4.1-2025- taking the longest as well, however, its token
04-14 ). Every given score for a single gener- usage is the lowest overall.
ated output of a request also includes a reason, With the method’s architectures in mind,
making the assessment of the Judge-LLM un- these results were expected to an extend. The
derstandable for a human. The scores range Simple method only uses a single LLM modules
from 1.0, being the worst possible score, to 5.0, while also generating function calls in a JSON
being the best possible score. schema in its normal output, resulting subse-
The remaining metrics in Table 2, Time and quently in a very low time for the benchmark
total Token usage, are accumulated for each test. The high number of tokens can also be
prompt given to the system using the specified explained by the fact, that the Simple method
method. This is possible since the benchmark is the only method unable to formulate multi-
prompts are the same for every method test. ple function calls in a single LLM inference. For
Each method exceeds in a different area for this reason, it is further the only method to not
the three metrics. While the Simple method set a limit for internal iterations, only stopping
uses the most tokens, it also takes the least if no valid JSON format was being output, as
amount of time by a large margin. The Simple- described in Section 6.1.
Tools and Tool-Chain methods are relatively The Simple-Tools and Tool-Chain methods
close in all areas, but will show distinctive char- are very comparable regarding the metrics in
acteristics in the tool usage comparison. The Table 2. Their inner structure only differs
Orchestration method performs the worst while from an additional LLM-component in the
6https://github.com/GT-ARC/opaca-llm-ui/ Tool-Chain method, which is encapsulated in
tree/main/tests/benchmark_results the single LLM modules of the Simple-Tools
12
method.
The Orchestration is a special case, since it
raises the minimum used LLM modules to six
per request, but performs overall the worst and
slowest of all methods. However, its redeem-
ing quality is the low number of used tokens,
since it follows a hierarchical approach of avail- (a) gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18
able functions, in which each function is only
accessible by its agent, which itself is only pro-
vided to the orchestrator module with a general
description. The strategy closely resembles a
divide & conquer approach, minimizing espe-
cially the input tokens for an LLM-call.
(b) Open-Source
7.3.2 Tool Selection Composition
We now compare the valid tool calling ability of Figure 6: LLM modules time distribution of
our methods and further compare this ability the Orchestration method with two models for
between our proprietary used model (gpt-4o- each benchmark prompting set. The colors cor-
mini-2024-07-18 ) and the open source models respond to the following LLM modules (Yel-
described especially in Section 6.4. The Mistral low: Orchestrator, Orange: Planner, Brown:
and Qwen model series were chosen in particu- Worker, Green: OverallEvaluator, Blue: Out-
lar, due to their wide range of available models putGenerator, Red: IterationAdvisor).
and comparability to the GPT series of Ope-
nAI.
Unlike the Judge-LLM response score, both method that has better or equal results while
the Simple-Tools and Tool-Chain excel in their using open-source models, although only in the
tool formulating capability in both prompting Multi-Tool scenario by a very small margin.
scenarios against the other methods. The most
noticeable difference between those two meth- 7.3.3 Resource Efficiency
ods is the ability of the Tool-Chain method
to formulate the correct tool call on the The ability to use given resources efficiently,
first attempt more often than the Simple-Tool especially in regard to computational needs,
method, resulting in more relative Perfect Tool is crucial for an effective tool call genera-
Usage results. tion strategy. To measure these metrics, each
The Simple method especially struggles with benchmark test additionally captures the ex-
the open-source model, most likely due to the ecution time provided by each implemented
custom schema that is necessary to lead to cor- model itself and additionally provides the dis-
rect tool calls. This theory is supported by tribution of the time for each LLM module
the correct tool formulation in other methods, within the selected method. For the Sim-
which use the “tool_call” output field of an ple/Simple-Tools method, this distribution is
LLM inference. However, the Simple is very not given, since the total time corresponds
strongly influenced by the used model, since to the only LLM module used within these
models that tend to output a lot of “chatter” methods. The distribution for the Tool-Chain
alongside its JSON schema output will also method is for all configurations very balanced
lead to a preemptive cancellation of the internal between the Generator and Evaluator mod-
chain, before the final answer could be reached. ules, with a roughly 50%-50% distribution be-
The Orchestration method present the steep- tween them. However, a larger variance can be
est relative drop from Correct Tool Usage to observed for the Orchestration method, show-
Perfect Tool Usage, indicating a lot of un- ing a clear difference between the two tested
necessary tool call formulation during the re- model configurations as well as the two differ-
sponse generation. However, it is also the only ent prompting scenarios.
13
In Figure 6, the results of the two bench- ronment is minimally invasive, while also pro-
marking prompts have been averaged. For all viding all advantages of an agentic microservice
benchmark tests of the Orchestration method, architecture.
the Worker is playing a crucial role in the The implemented methods have demon-
tool call generation process, by deciding what strated different strengths in various categories,
tools need to be called next for the given sub- important for the inference of LLMs, especially
task, showcased by its disproportional portion while formulating tool calls, such as valid tool
size in the overall time consumption of this formulation, response time, token usage, or an
method. Comparing the two used models with automated response score given by a judge-
their previous tool call construction rate in LLM. The ability to use multiple models, pro-
mind, the open-source composition is using the prietary and open-source alike, is another ad-
Orchestrator as well as the IterationAdvsisor vantage of our implemented system, making
more dominant. This is most likely due to the adaption of newly released models, such as
the amount of corrections the internal chain GPT-5, easy and without much effort.
of LLM modules have to apply, resulting in a However, even with more advanced models,
new invocation of the Orchestrator, which, in intelligent, multi-stage knowledge-flows have
an ideal tool planning phase, should have only a huge potential in complex service environ-
been invoked once. The IterationAdvisor is also ments. Especially the inclusion of OPACA’s
only called if the OverallEvaluator has decided abstraction layers of Agent Containers, Agents,
that a reiteration is necessary. Clearly, the and Actions can help to reduce the overhead
open-source composition struggles with finding produced by available tool call definitions. This
the right tool calls on the first attempt, which way, a larger amount of tool calls can be sup-
is further showcased in Figure 5 indicating a ported by a single LLM-system without reduc-
large portion of tool calls were not “perfect”, ing the overall performance, by leveraging core
but rather just correct after numerous attempts concepts of multi-agent technologies.
of the internal chain.
Overall, the implemented methods have
shown the reliable tool calling performance of 8.1 Outlook
the system, with different strengths regard-
ing the presented metrics. Consequently, each Besides constantly working on and improving
method has a different use-case in which it can the different prompting methods, their reliabil-
outperform the other methods, although for ity and performance, we are currently investi-
general tasks, the Simple-Tools and Tool-Chain gating ways to include more ‘proactive’ and ‘in-
method could be preferred, since their overall trospective’ functionalities into SAGE. Those
tool calling ability is a good choice for basic would, e.g., allow the system not only to adapt
tasks with a relatively fast response time. and re-configure itself based on the users’ in-
structions or (inferred) preferences, but also to
8 Conclusion schedule and manage tasks for (regular) exe-
cution at a later time. Those and similar ad-
ditions will enhance SAGE’s capability to sup-
In this work, we have presented, analyzed, port improved productivity in daily work.
and proved the effectiveness of our constructed
LLM-based methods in zero-shot inferences,
formulating tool calls provided by the OPACA
framework as agent actions and calling them Acknowledgments
over the OPACA RP. Our system “SAGE” is
further extendable, making it a solid choice We want to thank the entire development team
for scalable environments, while also introduc- of SAGE and OPACA, former and current, not
ing authentication and user-management to the all of whom were able to contribute to this arti-
connected multi-agent-system and individual cle, in particular Cedric Braun, Daniel Wetzel,
agent container. The adoption of the OPACA Tolga Akar, Benjamin Acar, and Abdullah Ki-
framework in an already existing software envi- wan.
14
References Muhammad Usman, Naveed Akhtar, Nick
Barnes, and Ajmal Mian. A comprehen-
[1] Benjamin Acar, Tobias Küster, Oskar F. sive overview of large language models,
Kupke, Robert K. Strehlow, Marc Guer- 2024.
reiro Augusto, Fikret Sivrikaya, and Sahin
Albayrak. OPACA: Toward an open, [9] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang,
language- and platform-independent API Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright,
for containerized agents. IEEE Access, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini
12:10012–10022, 2024. Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray,
et al. Training language models to follow
[2] Elias Frantar, Saleh Ashkboos, Torsten instructions with human feedback. Ad-
Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. Gptq: Ac- vances in neural information processing
curate post-training quantization for gen- systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
erative pre-trained transformers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.17323, 2022. [10] Gregory Polyakov, Ilseyar Alimova,
Dmitry Abulkhanov, Ivan Sedykh, An-
[3] Xinyi Hou, Yanjie Zhao, Shenao Wang, drey Bout, Sergey Nikolenko, and Irina
and Haoyu Wang. Model context protocol Piontkovskaya. Toolreflection: Improving
(mcp): Landscape, security threats, and large language models for real-world api
future research directions. arXiv preprint calls with self-generated data. In Proceed-
arXiv:2503.23278, 2025. ings of the 1st Workshop for Research on
[4] Wei Huang, Xingyu Zheng, Xudong Ma, Agent Language Models (REALM 2025),
Haotong Qin, Chengtao Lv, Hong Chen, pages 184–199, 2025.
Jie Luo, Xiaojuan Qi, Xianglong Liu, and [11] Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kun-
Michele Magno. An empirical study of lun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin,
LLaMA3 quantization: from LLMs to Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, Si-
MLLMs. Visual Intelligence, 2(1), Decem- han Zhao, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie
ber 2024. Zhou, Mark Gerstein, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan
[5] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Toolllm: Fa-
Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, cilitating large language models to mas-
Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao ter 16000+ real-world apis. CoRR,
Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient mem- abs/2307.16789, 2023.
ory management for large language model [12] Christian Rakow. A framework for sim-
serving with pagedattention. In Proceed- ulating mobility services in large scale
ings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium agent-based transportation systems. In
on Operating Systems Principles, 2023. Proceedings of the 2019 Summer Simu-
[6] Minghao Li, Yingxiu Zhao, Bowen Yu, lation Conference, SummerSim ’19, San
Feifan Song, Hangyu Li, Haiyang Yu, Diego, CA, USA, 2019. Society for Com-
Zhoujun Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. puter Simulation International.
Api-bank: A comprehensive benchmark
for tool-augmented llms. arXiv preprint [13] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto
arXiv:2304.08244, 2023. Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and
[7] Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John He- Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language
witt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilac- models can teach themselves to use tools,
qua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2023.
Lost in the middle: How language mod-
els use long contexts. arXiv preprint [14] Yewei Song, Xunzhu Tang, Cedric
arXiv:2307.03172, 2023. Lothritz, Saad Ezzini, Jacques Klein,
Tegawendé F Bissyandé, Andrey Boytsov,
[8] Humza Naveed, Asad Ullah Khan, Shi Ulrick Ble, and Anne Goujon. Callnavi,
Qiu, Muhammad Saqib, Saeed Anwar, a challenge and empirical study on llm
15
function calling and routing. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.05255, 2025.
[15] Yifan Song, Weimin Xiong, Dawei Zhu,
Wenhao Wu, Han Qian, Mingbo Song,
Hailiang Huang, Cheng Li, Ke Wang,
Rong Yao, et al. RestGPT: Connect-
ing large language models with real-
world restful APIs. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.06624, 2023.
[16] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki
Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Il-
lia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need.
Advances in neural information processing
systems, 30, 2017.
[17] Georg Wölflein, Dyke Ferber, Daniel
Truhn, Ognjen Arandjelović, and
Jakob Nikolas Kather. Llm agents
making agent tools. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.11705, 2025.
[18] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan
Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan,
and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reason-
ing and acting in language models. In In-
ternational Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations (ICLR), 2023.
[19] Jiayi Ye, Yanbo Wang, Yue Huang, Dong-
ping Chen, Qihui Zhang, Nuno Moniz,
Tian Gao, Werner Geyer, Chao Huang,
Pin-Yu Chen, Nitesh V Chawla, and Xian-
gliang Zhang. Justice or prejudice? quan-
tifying biases in llm-as-a-judge, 2024.
16
